---
layout: post
title: 2019 Fall CS 1340 Introduction to programming concepts
categories: Miscellaneous
excerpt: This class introduces programming concepts using python and its application in data science. It is appropriate for anyone who is interested in using  programming language to solve real world problems, especially data science  problems. 
---

# Course Syllabus 


### 1.0 Course Information

| Time                | Monday, Wednesday, Friday; 8:00-8:50 am |
| Office Hours:       | TBD                                     |
| Text, TA            |  No textbook required. TA: TBD          |
| Instructor Info:    | Xinyi Ding, email: xding@smu.edu        |
| Course GitHub Page: | https://github.com/dxywill/cs1340                                    |


### 2.0 Course Overview

This class introduces programming concepts using python and its application in
data science. It is appropriate for anyone who is interested in using 
programming language to solve real world problems, especially data science 
problems. The course objectives include (1) introduce core programming 
basics—including data types, variables, control structures,  etc. 
(2) usage of common programming principles such as objects, classes, 
and functional programming. (3) the utilization of common algorithms. 
(4) familiarity of basic concepts of data science. (5) usage of common tools 
like numpy, pandas, scikit-learn for data analysis. <strong>Prerequisite:</strong> None. 

### 3.0 Learning Outcomes

This course is constructed to introduce students the basic concepts of 
programming language using python. Students will also hone their abilities 
to use python for data analysis, preparing themselves for more advanced 
topics like, machine learning, etc.

At the end of this course students will be able to:

- Understand the basic concepts of programming language. 
- Learn basic data structures and algorithms.
- Debug existing code to evaluate conceptual errors and inefficiency.
- Apply methods for common file input and output techniques. 
- Create programs for exploratory data science applications in Python.

(1) Understand the basic concepts of programming language: 
 - Understand different data types like integer, float, string, etc.
- Understand control structures, if-else, loops, etc. 
- Organize code using functions, modules.
- Design more scalable and efficient programs using Object Oriented Programming (OOP).

(2) Learn basic data structures and algorithms
- Learn basic data structures like arrays, hash tables and their implementation in Python(list, dictionary, etc).
- Learn basic algorithms like sorting and search.
- Understand the time and space complexity of a program.

(3) Debug existing code to evaluate conceptual errors and inefficiency:
- Ability to use an integrated development environment in python (PyCharm).
- Ability to create reproducible analysis.
- Locate and explain syntax errors in a program.
- Use techniques for debugging programs.
- Use a variety of exception handling techniques.
- Use version control for managing code in teams.

(4) Apply methods for common file input and output techniques:
- Understand memory management and common data types used in data science.
- File manipulation, reading, writing, and common formats.
- String and document manipulation.

(5) Create programs for exploratory data science applications in Python:
- Ability to use tools like numpy, pandas and scikit-learn for data analysis.
- Ability to visualize data using tools like matplotlib. 
- Prepared for more advanced topics in data science, machine learning. 

### 4.0 Assignment 

Home and Lab assignments will periodically be assigned during the semester. 
These assignments will be given a rubric and detailed instructions for 
deliverables. One week notification will be given before Quizzes and are 
meant to reinforce the concepts from the readings for that week. 
A mid-term and final exam will be given and must be completed during 
lecture in the 7th and final week of the course. 

#### 4.1 Grading

| A  | 93.000 - 100    | C+ | 77.000 - 79.999 |
| A- | 90.000 - 92.999 | C  | 73.000 - 76.999 |
| B+ | 87.000 - 89.999 | C- | 70.000 - 72.999 |
| B  | 83.000 - 86.999 | D  | 60.000 - 69.999 |
| B- | 80.000 - 82.999 | F  | Else            |


### 5.0 Class Policies 

#### 5.1 Absences
Class attendance is required and part of the class participation grade. 
Students with two absences or less, who actively participate in class, 
will not receive any deductions for his/her absence. Starting with the third 
absence, 2% points from the final grade will be deducted for each absence 
(over the initial two absences). Please note: Rarely are these measures needed!


#### 5.2 Cheating
Cheating of any kind such as plagiarism or direct copying is strictly 
prohibited and against the SMU honor code. However, collaboration is strongly 
encouraged. Most assignments can be done as a group and turned in as a group. 

#### 5.3 Disability Accommodations
Students needing academic accommodations for a disability must first register with Disability
Accommodations & Success Strategies (DASS). Students can call 214-768-1470 or visit http://
www.smu.edu/Provost/SASP/DASS to begin the process. Once approved and registered,
students will submit a DASS Accommodation Letter to faculty through the electronic
portal DASS Link and then communicate directly with each instructor to make appropriate
arrangements. Please note that accommodations are not retroactive and require advance
notice to implement.

#### 5.4 Religious Observance
Religiously observant students wishing to be absent on holidays that require missing class
should notify their professors in writing at the beginning of the semester, and should discuss
with them, in advance, acceptable ways of making up any work missed because of the absence
(https://www.smu.edu/StudentAffairs/Chaplain/ReligiousHolidays).


#### 5.5 Excused Absences for University Extracurricular Activities
Students participating in an officially sanctioned, scheduled University 
extracurricular activity should be given the opportunity to make up class 
assignments or other graded assignments missed as a result of their participation. 
It is the responsibility of the student to make arrangements with the instructor 
prior to any missed scheduled examination or other missed assignment for making 
up the work. (See the University Undergraduate Catalog for details.)
Please note that this syllabus is subject to change. Any changes to the 
syllabus will be announced.

# Couse Schedule

| Week        | Topics/Readings | Assignement |
| ----------- | ----------- | ----------- |
| Week 1      | Introduction to course and material.  The concepts of data types, variables, assignment, statements, arithmetic operators and expressions.| |
| Week 2      | Strings and its manipulations: slicing, concat, find and replace, etc. Conditions and control statements: logic operators, if-else, loops.    | |
| Week 3      | Lists, tuples and dictionaries:  basic operators, inserting, removing elements, searching and sorting.      | |
| Week 4      |  Functions and modules: organize codes in function and modules, use import etc.  Reading/writing text to files, formatted file (csv, tab-separated) |   | 
| Week 5      | Object Oriented Programming (OOP): classes, objects, attributes, method, etc.   | | 
| Week 6      | More OOP: Inheritance, polymorphism, overloading, etc | |
| Week 7      | Mid-Term Exam|  |
| Week 8      | Introduction to data science and common tools like IPython, Jupyter Notebook. Numpy basics: arrays and vectorized computation.   | | 
| Week 9      | Introduction to Pandas and its data structures: Series, DataFrame Objects.  Data loading, indexing, selecting, cleaning and preparation.  | |
| Week 10     | More data manipulation: Join, Combine, Reshape, Aggregation and Group.  | |
| Week 11     | Data visualization and analysis using matplotlib.  Simple line plots, scatter plots, etc. | | 
| Week 12     | More data visualization and analysis, visualizing errors, density and contour plots. Plots customizing.| |
| Week 13     | Introduction to machine learning and scikit-learn. Linear regression. | |
| Week 14     |More advanced models in machine learning, support vector machine, naive bayes, neural networks, etc.   | |
| Week 15     | Final Week:Final Exam| |